Going further with Dev Containers (#776)
microsoft/code-with-engineering-playbook: docs/developer-experience/going-further.md

One way to achieve this is to leverage environment variables, with untracked `.env` file part of the solution being injected in the Dev Container.

Consider the following files structure:

```bash
My Application  # main repo directory
└───.devcontainer
|       ├───Dockerfile
|       ├───docker-compose.yml
|       ├───devcontainer.json
└───config
|       ├───.env
|       ├───.env-sample
```

The file `config/.env-sample` is a tracked file where anyone can find environment variables to set (with no values, obviously):

```bash
TENANT_ID=
SUBSCRIPTION_ID=
```

Then, each developer who clones the repository can create the file `config/.env` and fills it in with the appropriate values.

Under the folder `.devcontainer`, we introduce a `docker-compose.yml` file to be able to inject this `.env` file

```yaml
version: '3'
services:
  my-workspace:
    env_file: ../config/.env
    build:
      context: .
      dockerfile: Dockerfile
    command: sleep infinity
```

And in order to use the `docker-compose.yml` file, we need to adjust `devcontainer.json`:

```json
{
    "name": "My Application",
    "dockerComposeFile": ["docker-compose.yml"],
    "service": "my-workspace"
    ...
}

> ```

Author: You are correct, I could use instead:

```yaml
"runArgs": ["--env-file","config/.env"],
```

I kept docker-compose from our previous work because it had more things (dns, port forwarding ...). But for this sample, let's keep it simple. I will update accordingly

## Custom tools

While working on a project, any developer might end up writing a script to automate a task. This script can be in `bash`, `python` or whatever scripting language they are comfortable with.

Let's say you want to ensure that all markdown files written are validated against specific rules you have set up. As we have seen above, you can include in your Dev Container the tool [markdownlint](https://github.com/DavidAnson/markdownlint). Having the tool installed does not mean developer will know how to use it!

Consider the following solution structure:

```bash
My Application  # main repo directory
└───.devcontainer
|       ├───Dockerfile
|       ├───docker-compose.yml
|       ├───devcontainer.json
└───scripts
|       ├───check-markdown.sh
└───.markdownlint.json
```

The file `.devcontainer/Dockerfile` installs [markdownlint](https://github.com/DavidAnson/markdownlint)

```dockerfile
...
RUN apt-get update \
    && export DEBIAN_FRONTEND=noninteractive \
    && apt-get install -y nodejs npm

# Add NodeJS tools

> RUN npm install -g markdownlint-cli

Reviewer: The same could also be achieved using a `postCreateCommand` script.  It would be interesting to see when you would opt to update the docker file vs calling a script after the container has been created.

Author: That is a good question. Having what you can install in the Dockerfile will be cached if you need to rebuild - whereas I guess a script will always execute regardless of the state.

Our assumption was: whatever you can install with package managers (apt, npm, pip etc ...) let's do it in the Dockerfile. Eveyrthing that you cannot / or that required a check for the host architecture (Azure-cli, Terraform for instance), let's do it in a bash post command.

Also, we decided not to use `postCreateCommand` to execute our script but call it from the Dockerfile because we wanted to remain as agnostic as possible as not everybody was using vscode ... With that approach we can still share a common dev environment, letting developers choose their IDE

Author: How do you think I should proceed?

...
```

The file `.markdownlint.json` contains the rules you want to validate in your markdown files (please refer to the [markdownlint site](https://github.com/DavidAnson/markdownlint) for details).

And finally, the script `scripts/check-markdown.sh` contains the following code to execute `markdownlint`:

```bash
# Get the repository root
repoRoot="$( cd "$( dirname "${BASH_SOURCE[0]}" )/.." >/dev/null 2>&1 && pwd )"

# Execute markdownlint for the entire solution
markdownlint -c "${repoRoot}"/.markdownlint.json
```

When the Dev Container is loaded, any developer can now run this script in their terminal:

```bash
/> ./scripts/check-markdown.sh
```

This is a small use case, there are unlimited other possibilities to capitalize on work done by developers to save time.

> ## Other considerations

Author: This is where docker compose / mount volume can also be of used.
I will add a note on that

# Going further with Dev Containers

Dev Containers allow each developer to share a common working environment, ensuring that the runtime, whatever it is, is the same, same version with all the libraries required by the project.

> There are also other aspects that we do not necessarily think of at the beginning: tooling. And this, can mean two things:
> 
> 1. Leverage existing tools to enhance Dev Containers with more features,
> 2. Provide custom tools (such as scripts) for other developers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dev containers also allow us to:

1. Leverage existing tools to enhance the Dev Containers with more features,
2. Provide custom tools (such as scripts) for other developers.
```

There are other tools you can think of:

* Linting checks for your [markdown](https://github.com/DavidAnson/markdownlint) files,
* Linting checks for your [bash](https://www.shellcheck.net/) scripts,
* Etc...

Linting checks on files that are not *the source code* can ensure a common format with common rules for each developer. These checks should be also run in a [Continuous Integration Pipeline](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/architecture/example-scenario/apps/devops-dotnet-webapp), but it is a good practice to run them prior opening a [Pull Request](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/about-pull-requests).

## Limitation of custom tools

> If you decide to include [Azure-cli](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli) in your Dev Container, developers will be able to run commands against their tenant. However, to make developers' life easier, we could go further by letting them prefill their connection information, such as the `tenant ID` and the `subscription ID` in a secure and persistent way (do not forget that your Dev Container, being a [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) container, might get deleted, or the image could be rebuilt, hence, all customization *inside* will be lost).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you decide to include [Azure-cli](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli) in your Dev Container, developers will be able to run commands against their tenant. However, to make the developers' lives easier, we could go further by letting them prefill their connection information, such as the `tenant ID` and the `subscription ID` in a secure and persistent way (do not forget that your Dev Container, being a [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) container, might get deleted, or the image could be rebuilt, hence, all customization *inside* will be lost).
```

SUBSCRIPTION_ID=
```

Then, each developer who clones the repository can create the file `config/.env` and fills it in with the appropriate values.

In order now to inject the `.env` file into the container, you can update the file `devcontainer.json` with the following:

```json
{
    ...
    "runArgs": ["--env-file","config/.env"],
    ...
}
```

As soon as the Dev Container is started, these environment variables are sent to the container.

Another approach would be to use Docker Compose, a little bit more complex, and probably *too much* for just environment variables. Using Docker Compose can unlock other settings such as custom dns, ports forwarding or multiple containers.

To achieve this, you need to add a file `.devcontainer/docker-compose.yml` with the following:

```yaml
version: '3'
services:
  my-workspace:
    env_file: ../config/.env
    build:
      context: .
      dockerfile: Dockerfile
    command: sleep infinity
```

Too use the `docker-compose.yml` file instead of `Dockerfile`, we need to adjust `devcontainer.json` with:

```json
{
    "name": "My Application",
    "dockerComposeFile": ["docker-compose.yml"],
    "service": "my-workspace"
    ...
}
```

> This approach can be applied for many other tools by preparing what would be required. The idea is to simplify developers' life and new developers joining the project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This approach can be applied for many other tools by preparing what would be required. The idea is to simplify developers' lives and new developers joining the project.
```

    && export DEBIAN_FRONTEND=noninteractive \
    && apt-get install -y nodejs npm

# Add NodeJS tools
RUN npm install -g markdownlint-cli
...
```

The file `.markdownlint.json` contains the rules you want to validate in your markdown files (please refer to the [markdownlint site](https://github.com/DavidAnson/markdownlint) for details).

And finally, the script `scripts/check-markdown.sh` contains the following code to execute `markdownlint`:

```bash
# Get the repository root
repoRoot="$( cd "$( dirname "${BASH_SOURCE[0]}" )/.." >/dev/null 2>&1 && pwd )"

# Execute markdownlint for the entire solution
markdownlint -c "${repoRoot}"/.markdownlint.json
```

When the Dev Container is loaded, any developer can now run this script in their terminal:

```bash
/> ./scripts/check-markdown.sh
```

This is a small use case, there are unlimited other possibilities to capitalize on work done by developers to save time.

## Other considerations

### Platform architecture

When installing tooling, you also need to ensure that you know what host computers developers are using. All Intel based computer, whether they are running Windows, Linux or MacOs will have the same behavior.

> However, the latest Mac architecture (Apple M1/Silicon) being ARM64, behavior is not the same when building Dev Containers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, the latest Mac architecture (Apple M1/Silicon) being ARM64, means that the behavior is not the same when building Dev Containers.
```

> For instance, if you want to install [Azure-cli](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli) in your Dev Container, you won't be able to do it the same way you do it for Intel based machine. On Intel based computer you can install the `deb` package. However, this package is not available on ARM architecture. The only way to install [Azure-cli](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli) on Linux ARM is via the Python installer `pip`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For instance, if you want to install [Azure-cli](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli) in your Dev Container, you won't be able to do it the same way you do it for Intel based machines. On Intel based computers you can install the `deb` package. However, this package is not available on ARM architecture. The only way to install [Azure-cli](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cli/azure/install-azure-cli) on Linux ARM is via the Python installer `pip`.
```

To achieve this you need to check the architecture of the host building the Dev Container, either in the Dockerfile, or by calling an external bash script to install remaining tools not having a universal version.

> Here is below a snippet to call from the Dockerfile:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is a snippet to call from the Dockerfile:
```

An approach would be to mount your local `~/.ssh` folder into your Dev Container. You can either use the `mounts` option of the `devcontainer.json`, or use Docker Compose

* Using `mounts`:

```json
{
    ...
    "mounts": ["source=${localEnv:HOME}/.ssh,target=/home/vscode/.ssh,type=bind"],
    ...
}
```

As you can see, `${localEnv:HOME}` returns the host `home` folder, and it maps it to the container `home` folder.

* Using Docker Compose:

```yaml
version: '3'
services:
  my-worspace:
    env_file: ../configs/.env
    build:
      context: .
      dockerfile: Dockerfile
      - "~/.ssh:/home/alex/.ssh"
    command: sleep infinity
```

Please note that using Docker Compose requires to edit the `devcontainer.json` file as we have seen above.

You can now access Github using the same credentials as your host machine, without worrying of persistence.

### Allow some customization

As a final note, it is also interesting to leave developers some flexibility in their environment for customization.

> For instance, one might want to add aliases to their environment. However, changing the `~/.bashrc` file in the Dev Container is not a good approach as the container might be destroyed. There are numerous ways to set persistence, here is below one approach.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For instance, one might want to add aliases to their environment. However, changing the `~/.bashrc` file in the Dev Container is not a good approach as the container might be destroyed. There are numerous ways to set persistence, here is one approach.
```
